Hey, Concord, it's good to see you all, for those who are joining us online and at all of our campuses.
We're glad that you're here today.
I want to ask you to open your Bible to John chapter six and verse one.
And today we're going to talk about the subject, are you on empty?
Are you on empty?
I don't know if you're driven around in your vehicle, your truck, your car, your Jeep, whatever you drive.
And you're getting really, really close to the empty.
I mean, I know for some people, when they see the E on there, they think that means enough.
They don't know that it means empty.
They don't know they're about to run out of gas.
But I know in my life, there's been different times that I actually have run out of gas a couple of times.
It's a long time ago.
I'm not going to do that anymore.
But there are some people that just think it's some kind of game, daredevil, and that kind of thing to run on empty.
Well, with a vehicle, it's one thing.
But in life, sometimes we feel like we're running on empty.
And sometimes it feels that way physically, that you're just on empty.
Sometimes it feels that way emotionally or mentally.
And sometimes it feels that way spiritually.
I was reading a few years ago and a pastor was writing about this and he talked about the fact that sometimes if we're not careful as church leaders and as pastors, we can
so emphasize the spiritual component of that, that we almost sound simplistic in the way that we talk about answers and solutions and talk about how Jesus helps.
Let me give you an example.
Somebody might say, well, I'm physically like, I mean, really sick.
I mean, you're battling a, I mean, major illness, major injury, and you just are in the hospital, maybe you're, you know, taking medication and all these kind of things, and you're just physically just worn out.
I've been with many people at the hospital in that kind of setting, stop by to visit them and say, how are you feeling?
And they'll make this comment.
They'll say, as I'm here in the hospital, I just feel like I'm so far away from God.
In other words, their physical condition seems to impact their spiritual.
They feel closer to God when they're healthy.
And so when they're sick, they feel like, and so we have to ask, you know, is it based on feelings?
In the same way, somebody might be struggling with an emotional or mental thing situation, and they're like, man, God seems so far away.
Well, the truth is God is not far away, but he may feel that way.
Let me give you an example from a vehicle.
Years ago, before computerization of all the technology in our vehicles, y'all remember that we had actual gauges, right?
So you had a fuel gauge, an oil gauge,
and then a temperature gauge.
And so with the vehicle, if you're full on gas, but you have no oil, it doesn't matter how much gas you have in that thing, eventually that car is gonna stop because you don't have any oil.
That's gonna be a problem.
The same way if you've got fuel, you've got gas, and you have oil, but you don't have any radiator fluid, whatever, it perhaps is gonna overheat and it's gonna shut that whole engine down.
You get a problem.
Well in the same way,
We have to ask ourselves a question of, God wants us to be healthy and always.
And Jesus wants to fill our every need and give us wisdom.
But we have to ask the question, sometimes we're battling physical things and emotional and mental and spiritual.
And how is Jesus going to help to meet those needs?
Because a lot of times it does feel like we're running all empty.
And maybe you today are not exhausted.
Maybe you are, but if you're not, maybe there's people that you know
people in your family, people that you go to school with, people in your neighborhood at work, and they are exhausted.
They are empty.
Out of resources, not sure where and how to even get filled back up.
Well, the good news is Jesus can help.
He can give us wisdom, He can provide, and we look to Him for help.
Now, in this passage we're gonna read today.
For many people, it's a very familiar passage.
As a matter of fact, it's so important
that is actually in all four gospels.
There's a lot of the stories of Jesus, a miracle in Jesus that are not in all four gospels, they're in more than one many times, but this story is in all four gospels, just emphasizing how important it is for us to get our minds around.
But I'm gonna show you this passage.
There's several things that, and I'll just point them out quickly, that are not the main point, but they're things that you might notice in this passage that shows just how deep
and inexhaustible the word of God is.
This is the story of Jesus feeding the 5,000.
Okay, we're gonna get to it in a moment.
But you're gonna see in this story, you're gonna see how Jesus is led by the Father and how God leads him and guides him.
And in particular, you're gonna see how he chooses not to become an earthly king, but to stay right in line with God's plan.
You're also gonna see in here how Jesus gets refueled.
How he, when he's, I mean, just needing to spend some time alone, what he does.
You're gonna see what kind of leader Jesus is.
The kinds of questions he asks, the kinds of things he said, how he's organized and organizes the ministry and organizes his guys.
There's a lot of things in this passage that we see, but most of all, the main point of this passage is how Jesus is the one who fills us when we're empty.
And that's what we're gonna look at today.
Are you on empty?
Will you stand with me please for the reading of God's word?
John chapter six begin in verse one.
The Bible says after this, Jesus crossed the Sea of Galilee or Tiberias.
A huge crowd was following him because they saw the signs that he was performing by healing the sick.
Jesus went up on a mountain and sat down there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, a Jewish festival was near.
So when Jesus looked up and noticed a huge crowd coming toward him, he asked Philip, where will we buy bread so that these people can eat?
He asked us to test him, for he himself knew what he was going to do.
Philip answered him, 200 denarii worth of bread won't be enough for each of them to have a little.
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother said to him, there's a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish.
But what are they for so many?
Jesus said, have the people sit down.
There was plenty of grass in that place.
So they sat down.
The men numbered about 5,000.
Then Jesus took the loaves and after giving thanks, he distributed them to those who were seated.
So also with the fish as much as they wanted.
When they were full, he told his disciples, collect the leftover so that nothing is wasted.
So they collected them and filled 12 baskets with the pieces from the five barley loaves that were left over by those who had eaten.
When the people saw the sign he had done, they said, this truly is the prophet who has come into the world.
Therefore, when Jesus realized they were about to come and make him by force to make him king, he withdrew again to the mountain by himself.
Let's pray together.
Jesus, thank you for always being right where God
wants you to be.
Thank you for your ministry that we saw displayed when you're on the earth.
Thank you that you care about our every need.
We just sing about it.
We're seeing this passage.
In other words, thank you that when we are on empty, you fill us.
Show us what that means today.
And Father, help us to leave differently than when we came in because we have heard from you and by your spirit through your word, you've taught us.
and help each one of us to respond with faith and obedience today to what you're calling us to do.
In Jesus' name we pray, amen.
Please be seated.
So I've been to the Sea of Galilee.
I've been to Israel a few years ago.
I was there and we took a boat ride early in the morning and we're on the Sea of Galilee just sort of majestic, amazing and imagining Jesus there with his disciples back in the day.
And then we went to these different villages in the different areas
As a matter of fact, there's like small chapels that have been built there and you gotta understand, Israel is not that big.
It's like the size of New Jersey.
And so when they say, this is where this miracle happened, this is a really good chance.
That's exactly where it happened.
They've been saying that, you know, for 2,000 years because this is the spot where it happened.
And like you look around, you're like, well, that's probably about the only place it could have been is because it was right here.
In the Sea of Galilee today, and back then, there's lots of fish.
As a matter of fact, one of the places we ate was a little restaurant right beside the Sea of Galilee.
And I'm not a huge seafood guy.
I don't like some seafood, but man, this fish that we ate, they call it St. Peter's Fish.
It was really good.
So I don't know if you're already hungry for lunch.
I'm getting a little hungry.
This fish was really good.
Now, also the fields all around there in this area,
We're full of grain.
As a matter of fact, you know, so it just takes a little bit of work and a little bit of time and you can turn this grain into bread.
That's a couple things to think about with the context of this passage.
Jesus, it says in verse one and following, had been doing ministry and had been teaching, right?
So the miracles we've already seen the last few weeks.
And all of a sudden he goes to get a loan to refuel.
He gets a loan with God to pray.
This is why your Bible study teachers, your community group leaders, your pastors through the years have always thought about, your parents have talked about it's important to get along with God and for your rhythm of your life to involve times of even daily prayer.
Just you alone with God is because we need that time to refuel.
I don't care how extroverted you are.
I'm a pretty extroverted guy.
I need time just alone, me and God, just to refuel every day.
Jesus did it.
He said He went with the disciples, and in this case it points out His disciples and they were together.
But in another place of the Bible, and even at the end of this passage, it talks about going up to the mountain by Himself.
So Jesus does that to refuel.
Again, I want to point out that Jesus also was in step with what God wanted him to do.
That's one of the sort of side points of this story.
Because at the end of the story, after He does this amazing thing of feeding 5,000 plus people,
And they began to say, this is the prophet with the capital P. And they began to realize, man, maybe this is the earthly leader we've been looking for to overthrow the Roman government.
And so they're gonna try to make him earthly king by force, but Jesus won't allow it.
In other words, he's right in tune with God's plan.
He knew that God's plan was for him to come as God in the flesh, to live a perfect life, to down the cross for our sins,
to be buried and on the third day to rise from the dead, to offer salvation to everyone who would believe in him for the forgiveness of sins.
And so you today, if you don't yet know Jesus as Lord and savior, you can be saved today.
You can turn away from your sin and trust in Jesus as the only one who can save you and he will save you.
Jesus didn't deviate from that mission when he was on the earth.
And so he didn't let them make him king by force because he knew he was going to the cross.
And he knew he was going to the grave, and he knew he was going to rise from the dead.
We're going to get to this leadership principle in just a second, but I want to jump right into the story now.
There's all these people coming.
They're coming to hear and teach, but they also have seen the signs.
It says in verse number five, the crowd.
Jesus looked up and noticed a huge crowd coming toward him because they had verse two tells us,
A huge crowd was following him because they had seen the signs he was performing by healing the sick.
Some of the other Gospels tell us that specifically some of them were bringing sick people to Jesus.
So they were coming to hear and teach, coming to ask him to heal the sick.
All of a sudden, Jesus looks up and he asked Philip a question.
He says, where will we buy bread so that these people can eat?
So all of a sudden,
It occurs to Philip.
This is 5,000 plus people and it says 5,000 men.
We can assume many of their wives were there and their children were there.
Many of them had their wives there and their children.
So some scholars, even conservative estimates, estimate somewhere between 5,000 and 20,000 people were there.
That's a lot of people.
They're there.
But this question Jesus has Philip.
It might make you think it just occurred to Jesus.
All these people might be hungry.
But let me ask you a question.
Has it ever occurred to you that nothing ever occurred to God?
God already knows what's gonna happen.
Jesus was God in a flesh.
He knew what was gonna happen.
He knew what was gonna play out.
And the Bible even says this.
It says in verse six, he asked that to test him.
I say to my kids, I've said to them,
They're older now, teenager and young adults, but I'm always through their life.
I'll say, listen, sometimes I ask you a question that I know the answer to.
And I'll remind them of that because I want them to give me an honest answer, right?
So Jesus on this day was asking Philip a question.
That's one of the leadership lessons as we see in this is that Jesus involves Philip by asking him a question.
So if you're a spiritual leader, you're a leader and I involve other people in helping to come up with a solution even to looking to God for the answer.
Jesus asked that question, then in verse seven, Philip answered and said, 200 denarii worth of bread wouldn't be enough for each one of them to have a little.
Now a denarii was like one day's wage.
So whatever a person would make for working one day, it was gonna take 200 days of working to feed all these people.
It's a lot of money, a lot of money, right?
So one of the disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother,
does something he is always doing.
He said to him, here's what Andrew is always doing.
Andrew in the Bible is always bringing people to Jesus.
We should follow Andrew's example and always be bringing people to Jesus by praying for them, by literally inviting them to come to church with us, by literally sharing the good news with them.
So that's why I say even about this passage and about this story, maybe today you're running on empty, but maybe it's not you.
But you know somebody it is, that is, would you take the message you hear today and go share that with them this week and say, hey, here's something to think about from the Bible.
Andrew brings this boy to Jesus.
He says, there's a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are they for so many?
Put yourself real quickly.
We got some kids in the room.
You're the mindset.
You're this little boy.
Maybe, maybe he's honored that the leader, Jesus, the one that everybody came to see is going to ask for his food.
Maybe he's like, man, I am so happy to provide my food for Jesus.
Maybe.
Most likely he's like every normal kid I would know who's like, who is stealing my lunch?
Right?
I mean, he or his mom or his dad packed this lunch, told him to bring, maybe they're there with him.
I don't know.
But he's got a lunch and all of a sudden this guy Jesus, I would have been tempted as a little boy saying, can't Jesus get his own lunch?
I mean, didn't he bring, hey, if he, mom told me, I gotta be prepared.
If he's not prepared, he doesn't get to eat.
But this boy somehow or other brings his food and brings them.
But again, they're asking the question,
What are five loaves of bread and two fish among so many?
So Jesus says, have the people sit down.
Again, leadership lesson.
Jesus sees the problem.
Jesus formulates a plan.
Jesus involves other people in meeting this need.
Jesus meets it in a very orderly way.
So these are some, again, you think about your business.
You think about how you order your business.
These are leadership lessons that people are like, ah, okay, well that's how we solve problems.
Guess what?
The greatest leader that ever lived, Jesus, he solved problems the same way, because he knew how to solve them.
Jesus has the people sit down.
He says there was plenty of grass in that place, so they sat down, the men numbered about 5,000.
Here's the first thing I want you to see.
Are you on empty?
Here's number one.
Jesus provides miraculously.
Jesus provides,
miraculously.
Jesus takes five loaves of bread and two fish and he feeds 5,000 plus people.
That's a miracle guys.
Any way you look at it, it is a miracle of multiplication.
I've been to potluck meals before where slim pickings, right?
Somebody forgot to bring stuff.
I remember, you know, various potlucks through the years and people have said, man, it's loaves and fishes today.
You know, because they're thinking that the food's not gonna last, and then it's enough.
But on this day, there was literally no way that five loaves of bread and two fish were gonna feed all those people, except for a miracle of multiplication.
God just multiplied and multiplied.
Jesus began to break it and it began to multiply.
So therefore, if you've got a need in your life, it is right to call upon God and say, God, I need you to provide miraculously.
Because we serve a God who can do that.
When he chooses to provide miraculously, it is amazing.
And you say, well, I'm not sure if I believe in that miracle.
As a matter of fact,
You wouldn't be alone if you're a little skeptical about this.
There's other scholars who through the years have tried to explain this miracle away.
One of the most common explanations they would say is, you know that boy who brought the meal to Jesus, once they knew it was there, then it helped everyone else who had their lunches in their bags or in their coat.
They brought it out too.
They were just sort of being selfish or
hiding their meal until it was obvious at everyone.
And so there's this, you know, explanation of how people did it that way.
They actually had their food, but then they just got it out when Jesus began to distribute.
Listen, if God, the God of the universe can speak the world into existence and where the word can create the animals and the earth and the seas and the skies, he can take five loaves
and two fishes, and he can feed 5,000 people.
That ain't hard for him at all.
Not hard at all.
It was a miracle on that day.
And so if you're empty, you're unempty, physically, emotionally, mentally, spiritually, call out to God and say, God, I believe you can do a miracle.
I believe God that you can do what only you can do.
I am depending on you.
So it's a miracle.
of multiplication.
It's a miracle of God's provision.
It's also a miracle, though, of time.
Think about this.
I said earlier, the Sea of Galilee has tons of fish in it.
If you had given people enough nets or fishing poles, they could have gone and caught fish.
They would have had to then cook them and eaten them, but you give them enough time they can do it.
You give them enough time, they can take the grain that is growing and they can crush it and turn it into bread and then they can warm it over a fire and they can have bread tea.
But you know what, Jesus, he doesn't need to wait for the fish to get caught.
He doesn't need to wait for the bread to be baked.
Jesus can meet that need in an instant.
It's a miracle of time.
As we said recently, right on time, God provides.
It's a miracle.
Jesus provides miraculously.
Number two, Jesus provides completely.
Verse 10, the men numbered about 5,000, verse 11, then Jesus took the loaves and after giving thanks, he distributed to those who were seated.
So also with the fish as much as they wanted.
Let me just pause and say, do you recognize that probably for many of your families, you say a prayer of thanksgiving before you eat?
This passage and other passages like this in the Bible is why you do that.
It's not, again, just because grandma did it, it's because Jesus did it.
But Jesus takes the loaves and the fishes, and He gives it to the disciples, and they distribute to everyone, all five, 10, 15, 20,000 people.
Ever had me over there?
He provides completely.
So what I mean by that is, today, you've got a need, you're on empty, Jesus can meet your need.
You gotta need, you're on empty, Jesus can meet your need.
Don't worry that God's gonna run out.
He can meet all of our needs at the same time.
He heals completely.
He provides completely.
He is the one who provides in an amazing way.
And so, I don't know about you, but sometimes we're tempted to say, God, I know
You can solve that problem, but I don't know about mine.
I mean, even recently, I was talking to a friend.
It's like, man, I know that God is going to meet your need.
And I can speak that truth into their life and believe it with all my heart that God is going to provide completely.
But then hearing it back towards me, it's like, there's a little bit of doubt, right?
But God meet my need completely.
And the answer is yes.
The same God that can meet their need can meet your need.
Jesus provides completely for whatever need you have.
On this day, their need was food, physical food.
But on any given day, it may be you need something physically for God to provide, something mentally, emotionally, something that you need God to provide.
And let me just go ahead and say, make sure we're really clear on this.
You got a physical thing going on?
I mean, a health crisis?
We've said before, and I'll say it again.
We should start with prayer and say, Jesus, I'm asking you to heal.
And we should also go to the doctor.
Go to the doctor.
They are instruments in God's hands to help bring healing to our lives.
So we pray and believe in God.
And we also go to the doctor to do their work.
On this day, the disciples distributed the food.
They were Jesus' hands and feet.
And on any given day, you got physical thing going on, doctors and medicine.
They are how God brings healing.
In the same way, you got an emotional and mental thing going on.
Man, a challenge.
I mean, just crisis of life.
You go to God and you say, God, help me.
At the same time, you need complete healing.
You say, God, who are the people that are available, the resources?
And so perhaps you need to go see a Christian counselor
who can help to sort out these things or talk to a good friend, let them give you wisdom and guidance.
These are instruments, tools in God's hands, the resource that God's put.
So Jesus provides completely.
Third thing, Jesus provides miraculous and completely.
Thirdly, Jesus provides abundantly.
It says in the universe 11 that they all got as much as they wanted.
Do you know this is probably
Maybe.
The first reference in the Bible to buffets.
Do you realize that?
I don't know if it's a breakfast buffet, a lunch buffet, you know, a dinner buffet.
I don't know what your favorite one is.
But these guys, they didn't gorge themselves, but they had as much as they wanted.
In other words, they didn't have to just be like, I'm just going to get a little.
No man, they had as much as they wanted.
Jesus, I mean, filled their need.
completely, abundantly, with as much as each person need.
John 10-10, the Bible says, the thief, Satan, right, comes to steal, kill, and destroy.
He comes to steal hopes and dreams, marriages.
He comes to destroy families, futures.
The thief comes to steal, kill, and destroy.
But Jesus says, I have come that you may have life,
and have it more abundantly.
Abundant life in Christ, filled with His Spirit, abundant each and every day.
Jesus is the one who can provide.
On this day, what we see is He absolutely provides for them as much as they wanted.
And on you, Jesus says that He wants us to know.
And Paul even writes about it later.
He says, listen, my God,
shall supply all I need according to his glorious riches in Christ Jesus.
God provides all your needs.
And Paul even tells us to pray.
And he says, listen, when we pray, God answers and weighs abundantly above and beyond even what we can ask or even imagine.
So the Bible says Jesus provides abundantly.
So I don't know what you're going through today, but God does and He cares.
And when we are empty,
He says, I will fill you with my spirit and I will fill you abundantly, abundantly.
When we come to the end of ourselves and recognize we can't meet our own needs on this, Jesus is the one who absolutely fills abundantly.
He provides abundantly.
Here's the fourth thing.
Jesus doesn't waste anything.
Look at verse 12 and 13.
When they were full, the people, he told his disciples,
Collect the leftovers so that nothing is wasted.
So they collected them, and they filled 12 baskets with the pieces from the five barley loaves that were left over by those who had eaten.
Think about this for a minute.
Those disciples.
Now for the kids in the room, think about this question.
Why are there 12 baskets left over?
Kids in the room, think about it.
Maybe some of you adults know.
Why are there 12?
because there's 12 disciples.
Imagine the disciples as they're passing this stuff out, everybody else.
Maybe there's a thought in their mind, I wonder if I'm gonna get any.
Is there gonna be any left for me?
Have there ever been times that you do say, I see all these other needs being met, but what about for me?
What about does God care about me being empty?
Oh, God cares.
And He doesn't waste anything.
The pain of your life, the pain for these guys may have been just the hunger pain of a few minutes or longer as they had to get the food to everyone else.
But they're like, is it ever gonna come around where Jesus can meet my needs?
Hey, first of all, it's about God's glory not mine.
But the bottom line is yes, Jesus,
He doesn't waste anything.
You see that God recognizes that we live in a broken world.
It pains him.
He's compassion.
It breaks God's heart that because of our sin and because of the sins of others, there's pain in this world.
And there's hunger.
And there's emptiness.
And there's all these turmoil and strife.
But the scripture is really clear where it says that there is absolutely for God's
God's children, there is nothing that is wasted.
God shall supply all your need according to His glorious riches in Christ Jesus.
And in Romans chapter eight, do you know this verse?
Romans chapter eight, verse 28, I want to read it right out of the scripture.
He says, we know that all things work together for the good, for those who love God who are called according to His purpose.
We know that all things work together for the good.
God doesn't waste anything.
You look back in the rear view mirror and you say, that pain was awful.
That emptiness was terrible.
But boy, how God has met my needs and filled me.
And it's more beautiful today because of what God has done.
Jesus doesn't waste
anything.
I'm sorry for your pain.
God's sorry for your pain, but God doesn't waste anything.
This is good news for you and me and everyone that we can share this message with.
Jesus doesn't waste anything.
And so the question as we close is this, are you empty today physically, mentally and emotionally, spiritually,
If you are, come to Jesus and let Him meet your needs.
As well as ask Him to direct you to others this week that you can share this message with.
Think how easiest would be to tell someone.
You could tell them the story and you could say, man, I see in this passage that God, He provides miraculously and completely and abundantly and He doesn't waste
anything.
So if you're on empty today, come to Him and let Him fill you and leave this place different because of what Jesus has done in your life.
Let's pray together.
Heads are bowed and eyes are closed.
My first question is, are you a believer?
Are you a follower of Jesus?
Have you been saved?
If you have, then praise God for that.
Praise God for your faith in Jesus.
But if you're a believer, even a believer could say today, man, I feel like I'm running on empty.
And today you would want to spend some time in prayer asking Jesus to refuel you.
I mean that you would be filled with his spirit, dependent on him.
And today you come and say, I'm empty, but let me leave filled.
And you could pray at your seat or in just a moment, if you'd like, when we stand and sing,
Maybe you want to come and pray at the front here.
Just a place that you could say, I'm bringing my emptiness to him, and I'm going to leave filled today.
Something about moving sometimes and praying at a place like this can be very powerful.
Others of you, let me ask you a very important question.
The question is this, whether you're in this room or watching online, or even those at our campuses,
Do you know Jesus as your Lord and Savior?
If you say, I don't yet, but I need to be saved.
I mean, you recognize that Jesus died on the cross for your sins.
You recognize that he rose from the dead and he will save you.
He will forgive you.
He will give you eternal life.
Then from where you're seated right now, would you just pray to him and say, Jesus, save me.
If today,
you're ready to give your life to Christ.
In a moment, we're gonna stand and we're gonna sing.
Could I ask you, the youngest person in the room to the oldest, if you need to be saved today, would you come to myself and one of other pastors and say, today I need to give my life to Christ.
Today I need to be saved.
Do that.
Bring somebody with you if you need to.
Hey, this church family loves, loves, loves to celebrate.
when people give their lives to Christ.
Others of you, you may be saved, but you need to be baptized at some point in the future.
You've never been baptized as a believer.
We would love to get that set up.
Would you come and share that with one of us as well?
And thirdly, maybe there's some of you who are ready to take the next steps to become a member.
Come and share that with us today, that we can get that process started, and man, you can become a member and really plugged in here at Concord in every way.
So let me pray, and whether you want to come for prayer, salvation, baptism, or membership, invite you to come and respond today the way God's willing you to come.
Lord Jesus, we love you.
We ask that you have your way now during this time of invitation and response.
We pray that each one of us would respond as you're calling us to do.
In Jesus' name we pray, amen.
Please stand and you come.